Well, when I came on board, we had great difficulty
getting people, honest astronomers, to look at
the planets. That changed when we had specific
problems that were of interest to people, such as
what is the actual surface pressure on Mars? I
remember it when IceBinRad came out with that
number. That was a bombshell because they had
already started building probes for 85 millibar
surface pressure. Right. When we started to pique
the interest of astronomers with some specific
problems, the astronomers started to use the
techniques, the technologies that had been
developed in the interim to look at the planets.
They had not, with the exception of a very few
people. Bill Sinton and company did the infrared.
They were doing spectra. Kuiper was doing some
work, but there were a very limited number of
people. But when a serious problem came along, and
why did these astronomers pay attention to
planetary problems? Because NASA said, we are
going to send spacecraft to these planets. We are
going to find out something. Planets became of
greater interest to the public, the
universities, and to the scientists. And what we
did in those areas was simply to say, if we had a
problem such as, let's say, the surface pressure
on Mars, bring together people that we thought
might have some idea of how to approach the
problem. You know, bring them together in a big
meeting. Money was no problem in those days. Say,
here's the problem. Here's what they told us in the
past. We just want you to think about the problem.
What we need is this." And many of them went away and
said, hey, I can think of a technique to give you
that answer. And the surface pressure of Mars was a
very good example of that problem.
What do you think of the future of planetary
astronomy? Is it going downhill?
The answer to that is I think that the problems are
becoming more difficult.
I think that the type of problems that interest
most astronomers
are no longer relevant in the planetary area, but I
think that there are many problems that interest
related fields are becoming more important.
For example, there are things associated with,
let's say, volcanology on Io
that are becoming important, but most
astronomers aren't interested in volcanology.
I think that there are a large number of problems
that can be worked on the planets that we didn't
consider significant before because we didn't
have the ground truth that has come as a result of
the spacecraft. But now that we know what's
actually happening on a planet, we can go back and
learn how to interpret our telescopic
observations. I think there's another area, and
that is high resolution imaging, high resolution
infrared or spectroscopy, primarily infrared.
Because that's where the absorption bands of
interest are. Are, yeah. I think that there are a
lot of problems that are coming up that can be
approached with new technologies,
and we can do a lot of work on them. For example, if we
can get reasonably high-resolution images of a
planet like Jupiter. There's a lot of meteorology
that can be done on Jupiter. In that line, I noticed
that
the CCD images they've taken of Mars really look
like Mars does when you have a good telescope and a
good site and a good night, and you see all this
detail but never able to photograph it because you
couldn't beat the seeing in the old days. And you
get this variegated appearance which looks kind
of strangely familiar to me, but it's just another
example on a very obvious level of look what we can
see. And we've mentioned Jupiter with that sort of
stuff where before it all had to be visual because
they couldn't photograph it and make a permanent
reference. And the other thing is we didn't know
what it was we were looking at. of things that they
saw on the surface, for example, of Jupiter, that
they didn't know whether they were optical
illusions or something actually there. We know
now, in many cases, there were features that were
there which we can use as tracers.
But we are able to do things like three-tenths of an
arc second at times with some of the telescopes,
depending on the site. But with new
instrumentation, we may be able to do that well on a
continuous basis, if not even a little better than
that. And if you can do that, there are a lot of
problems that you can solve. There's been a lot of
talk for the last 10 or 20 years, as a matter of fact,
about the practical importance of planetary
astronomy. The Earth is a planet.
And in the last couple of years, there's been a
whole lot of attention, at least in the popular
press, to kill our asteroids and comets and things
like that. Do you think that's overdone, or do you
think that we ought to try and get every buck we can?
Oh. Again, it's purely a subjective opinion
question, but there's no objective way of
answering it. No, I think that some of these things
are important to study. I don't think, for
example, killer asteroids, they say that the ones
that are going to hit us and do some damage we will
never even see. And if you do see them, they'll be so
close that you don't have any time to do anything
about them. But like everything else, I don't know
of any situation where more knowledge has hurt us.
I know it gets a lot of popularity some of these
things. But I think that there is some good, valid,
beneficial use that comes from studying some of
this stuff. And the cost of studying it is
negligible compared to the cost of a lot of other
programs. My concern is this, that if there is a
demise of planetary or solar system exploration
with spacecraft, it's going to be very difficult
to try to get the funds necessary to continue a
significant program in planetary astronomy.
That brings up a point. How much of an impact on
funding do you think the fact that there is no
evidence whatsoever of life on Mars has had?
That's a difficult question to answer. If they
would have found one organic molecule, do you
think we would have had more probes? The answer to
that is probably not that much different.
I think we are still interested in pursuing
examination of Mars for possible life forms. I
think that, you know,
maybe not the way we did it with the Viking mission,
but I think that there is still an interest there.
There certainly is an interest in Mars. Now, if
this creature on Mars keeps devouring our
spacecraft and we quit, we might find out
something. That brings up a point. The loss of the
Mars Observer, from what I could tell, came as
quite a shock to a lot of the scientists and
engineers involved, but we both go back far enough
to remember the sixties when Ranger One through
Six failed their Air One family. You'd think this
was a a useful, if you will, slap in the face at
overconfident people?
Maybe, yes, but I think it's also a danger. It's a
very dangerous one. You know, we've often said,
does success
bring success or does failure bring success? And
with success, I mean the latter part of that is more
money. more programs. If you have a successful
program, there's a tendency by the powers that be
that says, well, you've learned what you wanted to
learn. Let's turn our efforts to something else.
And so when you have a failure, there's quite often
the position that, gee, you know, it's too bad, but
we should really follow up. And we'll probably get
another Mars mission for just that reason. It may
have been harder if this mission had been
successful to get another Mars mission than if
this had been a failure. A good example of that is
Space Telescope.
So it's hard to say.
I don't know, and this is sort of off the record, are
now saying, hey, you better look at plans for
another Mars observer or one that can do part of the
mission of Mars that Mars observer was for.
Nobody's canceled the measure pathfinder
mission yet. We're still going ahead with measure
network. So it hasn't brought an end to the
program. The thing that concerns me is that at the
time when a space program does come to an end, that
the ground-based program, which is still capable
of producing tremendous results, is probably
going to lose funding as well. And the
ground-based stuff, of course, information
comes much cheaper than anything. There's no
comparison. Yes, that's one of the things I want to
do. There's been endless books written about all
the wonderful things that Viking and Voyager have
done, but most of our information on the planets
still comes from the ground. Would you agree?
Well, not really. Of course, there's a lot of stuff
we've never seen. No. The information that we got
from the spacecraft, you cannot get any other way
than from the spacecraft.
Which is the way it's supposed to be. Which is the
way it is supposed to be. However, the fact that
we've got all this good information from a
spacecraft does not nullify the need for
ground-based observations and, in fact,
increases the value of ground-based
observations. Just thinking that now that we
know... Yes.
Excuse me. I was just going to say that once you find
out something from a spacecraft, you often find
out that really need a spacecraft. I'm thinking of
the great dark spot on Neptune. Now that we know
it's there, people are looking at old visual
drawings of Neptune and finding it. Oh, yes. Well,
that's it. As soon as you know what the ground truth
is, you don't necessarily have to keep repeating
it. Now, it is true that we would like to know at
greater resolution what the surface looks like,
but Jupiter is an excellent example. We can study
the motions in the Jovian atmosphere features
down to a certain size quite well from the ground.
And if you had something like the space telescope,
extremely well. The volcanic activity on Io is
studied not continuously, but on quite a
continuous basis from the Earth. Look at comets.
Now that we know what a comet looks like, and how the
emissions from a comet take place, we can learn a
lot more about comets from the ground than we were
ever able to in the past. The same thing, I'm sure,
is going to be true about asteroids. So the value of
ground-based astronomy has not been diminished
but has been increased.
Let me switch to a different topic I've asked this
because I was looking at this part of your records
yesterday at the NASA history office, and there
was a big funding crunch in 1973. I mean, your
budget had been going up, and then slam-bang, it
started to go down. What was that like?
Well, it was disaster, of course. because many of
the programs that were going along and growing had
to be cut back. Many less people were funded. At
that time, we started our abortion, if you will, of
planetary astronomers, and I never really
recovered from that. So I'm trying to think of
something that was specifically affected at that
time. Me. Well, you was one thing. But we did have
some very severe cutbacks in NASA. We had some
severe cutbacks in what we could do. One of the
things, for example, that we wanted to do when we
built the IRTF is to equip it with the best
instrumentation possible. Because of budget
cuts, we had to stop building any instrumentation
for it. So what we're working with today is last
decade's instrumentation. And it's very
expensive to do it, because you're having to do
stuff with the instrumentation that's not as
good. It takes far longer to do the job, and it just
is not satisfactory. It ends up by costing you much
more money than it would if you could do it with
today's technology.
Based on your experience, do you think that NASA in
general over-manages science, under-manages
science, does it about right? From a personal
point of view, I think it depends very much on the
type of program. In the case of data analysis,
I think we do it about right. People write
proposals. The proposals are reviewed by their
peers. We fund one of them we can. I think that there
is some good work that we don't fund. I think
there's also some poor work that gets proposed by
good scientists and sometimes does get funded,
but that's the way the dice comes up. But I think
that there are programs where we are trying to look
for new things that money is wasted because the
programs are not managed closely enough and i
don't think in these cases that people are to blame
many people go down the wrong path unknowingly
because somebody isn't taking a look at it and
saying hey wait a second is that really the way you
want to go not that they want to be directed
But I think we have to stay on top of and take an
overview of many things in order to do it properly.
I've heard a lot of comments that with flight
missions in particular, NASA shows the pretty
pictures and then chops off the data analysis.
What do you think about that? We chop off the data
analysis only when we cannot get any more money. We
are just, I have been responsible for the program.
Which is? Neptune Data Analysis Program, and
that's basically Voyager data analysis. We are
now in our fourth year of that, and that is after the
first year or two in which the investigators were
supported, and that's being funded at a level of on
the order of $3 million a year. Now, we would have
liked to have funded it earlier for more money,
let's say $5 million a year, $6 million a year, and
done it. I think there's still a lot of good data
that can be taken out of it. I think that there are
gaps, and what I mean by gaps is this. I personally
have been heavily involved in the Voyager mission
since I've been the Voyager program scientist for
the Uranus and Neptune encounters.
We can know a lot more about Jupiter and Saturn
today because of material we have learned about
Uranus and Neptune. We do not have a legitimate
data analysis program on either Jupiter or Saturn
or on the outer planets as a whole. What we have a
program for right now is to reduce the data that we
got at Neptune.
But as a scientist, you can understand that
something we learned at Neptune, they say to
somebody, hey, wait a second. If we do the same
analysis on Uranus, We're going to get some very
important information out about Uranus and about
the other planets in general. We have to say to
them, sorry, but unless you can tie it into
Neptune, we can't support you under this program.
So there are areas where, I would say after the
fact, you might want to come back and take a new look
at some old data. we have not always been able to do
that because we just don't have the money in the
programs. Yeah, on interviewing myself when I was
at headquarters, I really did run into the problem
you did of having lots of money. In fact, that's
where the original idea came from to build the
telescopes at Texas and Hawaii was that I guess Bob
Bryson and somebody else had like four million
dollars that they couldn't spend like lunar
geology. And, of course, you don't want to turn
money back. You've got to spend it. So Roger Moore
found this out, and I went to Ernie Liddell, and he
went to Orrin, and we said, look, we found a way to
spend this money. And we couldn't get people to
take the money, which is ridiculous. Pete Orrin's
going to kill me for this, but I told him back in
January that if he can do what he says he's going to
do with Clementine for the amount of money there's
going to be hell to pay at NASA, The reason I bring
this up is there's a lot of talk about they're going
to dismantle NASA and so forth. And I don't know
which side I'm on because I worked for NASA, worked
at headquarters, but the Air Force paved my way
through my Ph.D. and supported me at Aerospace
Corporation.
Do you see any big changes? Again, this is
subjective, but you're not working for the agency
anymore, so I don't even know if it will be in the
book, but I'm curious. One of the things that
bothers me about Clementine is that everybody is
touting it as to how wonderful a program you can do
for a very little expense. I told Gordon, I said,
you can't even build a flight-qualified
spectrograph for $55 million. Okay. The
difficulty is they don't realize all the money
that's been spent bringing everything up to the
status it has today to be put into Clementine. We
could not start from scratch, like NASA has to do,
and fly Clementine for the price that they're
flying it for. It's the fact that there's millions
and millions and millions of them. In fact, a
hundred million. I don't know how much into these
specific instruments, but there's been a lot of
money going into these things, which they're able
to assemble relatively inexpensively and fly
relatively inexpensively. And I think it's very
misleading.
Do you think NASA has a future?
I think it has a very good future. I think it—well,
let me back off for a moment. Does it have the
potential for a future? The answer to that is yes.
There are many very good things you can do in space,
and you can do it relatively When I say relatively
inexpensively, you don't have to spend $10
billion a year. You might be able to get by for $4
billion a year. You're not going to get by for a few
hundred million dollars a year. On the other hand,
is NASA going to survive by budget, off the budget,
Congress? I don't know. I think it has some real
serious problems there. From Fred Whipple and
Gerard de Bacolor and down, the opinion that I've
gotten so far from, I don't know, at least 30 people
on the record is that NASA money was absolutely
crucial to the rebirth of modern planetary
astronomy. Oh, absolutely. There's no question
about it. It was planetary astronomy. In fact, it
was very strange. Sitting in this desk, or not this
desk, but the desk I had from 1964, I was planetary
astronomy in the United States.
It was a very small field then, wasn't it? You knew
everybody. No, but it grew. And it's amazing to me
today to meet people and say, hey, you are
responsible. You are responsible for me being
what I am today, because it was the money that you
gave in this grant to this institution that
allowed me to have, you know, a postdoc or graduate
student support or something else in planetary
astronomy. Not only that, but you realize that
Hawaii, Texas, Arizona, there's a tremendous
amount of research being done with instruments
that NASA built. We didn't physically build them,
but we provided the funds for them, and they've
been very beneficial. I mean, it's absolutely
amazing to me. The community, the non-planetary
infrared community, complained bitterly about
the IRTF.
They still complain bitterly about the IRTF.
Their complaint now is they don't get enough time
on it. Okay. But for a long time they complained
bitterly because it was a waste of money as far as
they could see, and while it might be useful for
some planetary astronomers, who didn't do decent
science anyway, there was no good science could be
done with that telescope.
Gee, there was one other question I wanted to ask.